feat(components): Explain the connector template editor (#1181)
camunda/camunda-platform-docs: docs/components/modeler/web-modeler/advanced-modeling/manage-connector-templates.md

---
id: manage-connector-templates

> title: Manage connector templates

Reviewer: The last state of the discussion was to capitalize `Connectors`

Reviewer: (This is the case in general for this PR. Maybe @christinaausley can clarify)

Author: I updated the capitalization in the title, but not in the text; @christinaausley I think it makes sense to merge this first, then update the capitalization in-text in a seperate PR over all occurences in the docs?

Reviewer 2: I am launching a PR shortly to uppercase all instances of Connectors, but I'll go ahead and capitalize those instances here while doing my technical review.

<span class="badge badge--cloud">Camunda Platform 8 only</span>

You can create and manage [connector templates](/components/integration-framework/connectors/custom-built-connectors/connector-templates.md) just as any other asset in a Web Modeler project.

## Create connector templates

You can create a new connector template using the following steps:

1. Navigate to the project of your choice and click **New**.

2. Choose to create a blank **Connector Template**.

   ![Creating a new template](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-1.png)

3. You will be taken to the **connector template editor** screen. In this screen, you can define the connector template by writing the template JSON. The template editor supports you in writing the template by providing autocompletion, error highlighting and a live preview.

   The anatomy of the editor interface is as follows:

   - In the **breadcrumbs bar**, you can rename your template by clicking the chevron next to the template name. Note that you cannot change the name of your template in the template json, but only with this action.

>    - On the left, you see the **template JSON editor**. Here, you describe the actual template specification. The specification follows the [most recent element template schema](https://github.com/camunda/element-templates-json-schema). The editor is divided into two sections: a read-only section, containing the schema reference, the template name, and the template id, and a editable section, where you can [write your template specification](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/defining-templates.md).

Reviewer: Consider using the same wording as we do in element template docs ([ref](http://localhost:3000/docs/next/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/defining-templates/)):

```suggestion
   - On the left, you see the **template JSON editor**. Here, you define the actual template descriptor. The descriptor follows the [most recent element template schema](https://github.com/camunda/element-templates-json-schema). The editor is divided into two sections: a read-only section, containing the schema reference, the template name, and the template id, and a editable section, where you can [define your template descriptor](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/defining-templates.md).
```

   ![Template editor anatomy](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-2.png)

4. Once you've written your template, you can **publish** it by clicking on the corresponding action. You will be prompted to optionally enter a version name. This name appears in your milestone list.

   ![Publishing a template](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-3.png)

5. After publishing, the template can be applied to elements of all models in the same project.

   :::info Project scope
   A connector template is always associated with a project, hence only available in the project where you added it.
   :::

### JSON editor features

The JSON editor is based on the [Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/). The Monaco Editor is the editor that powers VS Code. As a result, the template editor supports many familiar features such as auto-formatting, indentation support, code completion, and error highlighting. Read the [VS Code editor docs](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/editingevolved) for a full overview of features.

### Versioning connector templates

> You can version your connector templates using [milestones](/components/modeler/web-modeler/milestones.md), similar to diagrams.

Reviewer: I would add something like this, because this is I think a common real-life question:

`If you publish a new version of a Connector template, and the old version was already used in diagrams, the user can decide to update to the most recent version, or to stay with the old version when editing the respective diagram element (see updating [element templates](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/using-templates/#updating-templates)).`

Author: Thanks, this totally makes sense!

![Some connector template problems highlighted in the first line](img/connector-templates/fix-connector-template-problems-2.png)

<!--
## Reusing existing runtimes

Not only can you create new connector templates to bind to a job worker topic or a custom connector SDK function, but you can also reuse [existing connector runtimes](/components/integration-framework/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/available-connectors-overview.md). For instance, if you add the following property and bind it to `zeebe:taskDefinition:type`, you can reuse the HTTP JSON runtime and write a prefilled connector template to call an API easily.

```json
{
    "type": "Hidden",
    "value": "io.camunda:http-json:1",
    "binding": {
        // highlight-next-line
        "type": "zeebe:taskDefinition:type"
    }
}
```
-->

## Importing existing connector templates

If you have created templates for Desktop Modeler in the past and want to reuse them in Web Modeler, you need to make some adjustments to the template files.

> 1. _Split the files_. Web Modeler maintains a 1:1 relation between connector templates and files. Since Desktop Modeler allows to keep multiple template definitions in single file, you must split the file in advance to one file per temmplate before uploading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. _Split the files_. Web Modeler maintains a 1:1 relation between connector templates and files. Since Desktop Modeler allows to keep multiple template definitions in single file, you must split the file in advance to one file per template before uploading.
```

---

export const UploadIcon = () => <span style={{verticalAlign: "text-top"}}><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 24 24" width="16" height="16"><path d="M0 0h24v24H0z" fill="none"></path><path d="M9 16h6v-6h4l-7-7-7 7h4zm-4 2h14v2H5z" fill="currentColor"></path></svg></span>;

<span class="badge badge--cloud">Camunda Platform 8 only</span>

You can create and manage [connector templates](/components/integration-framework/connectors/custom-built-connectors/connector-templates.md) just as any other asset in a Web Modeler project.

## Create connector templates

You can create a new connector template using the following steps:

1. Navigate to the project of your choice and click **New**.

2. Choose to create a blank **Connector Template**.

   ![Creating a new template](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-1.png)

3. You will be taken to the **connector template editor** screen. In this screen, you can define the connector template by writing the template JSON. The template editor supports you in writing the template by providing autocompletion, error highlighting and a live preview.

   The anatomy of the editor interface is as follows:

>    - In the **breadcrumbs bar**, you can rename your template by clicking the chevron next to the template name. Note that you cannot change the name of your template in the template json, but only with this action.

Reviewer 2: What is the breadcrumbs bar for clarification given we don't have a screenshot example here?

Author: @christinaausley There's a screenshot below, covering all bullet points in this section, but maybe too far away from this text. But I tried to avoid redundancy. I can add one if you like

Reviewer 2: You could always just say "in the **breadcrumbs bar** pictured below,..."

Reviewer 2: You could always just say "in the **breadcrumbs bar** pictured below,..."

   - On the left, you see the **template JSON editor**. Here, you define the actual template descriptor. The descriptor follows the [most recent element template schema](https://github.com/camunda/element-templates-json-schema). The editor is divided into two sections: a read-only section, containing the schema reference, the template name, and the template id, and a editable section, where you can [define your template descriptor](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/defining-templates.md).
   - On the right, you see the live **Visual Preview**. The live preview shows how the properties panel will look when you apply the template to an element. It automatically updates on every valid change, and reflects the latest valid state of the template. The preview allows you to interactively check your template before publishing, including its usability.
   - In the upper left, you can **Upload an icon** for your template. You can upload any image file you want, however we recommend to use squared SVG graphics. The icons get rendered 18x18 pixels in the element on the modeling canvas, and 32x32 pixels in the properties panel.

>    On every valid change, the template is saved automatically. In case of a problem, the template is not saved, and you need to [fix it beforehand](#fixing-template-problems).

Author: @christinaausley I hope you can rephrase it better :) - This means that if there is an error in the json (missing attribute or uncompleted brackets, basically everytime mid-editing), the template is not saved. It will only be saved once it is 100% valid. (This also means it is not possible to save a intermediate version with an error in it manually)

>    On every valid change, the template is saved automatically. In case of a problem, the template is not saved, and you need to [fix it beforehand](#fixing-template-problems).

Reviewer 3: We can update text from "In case of a problem, the template is not saved, and you need to [fix it beforehand] (#fixing-template-problems)."
to "If errors in the JSON are encountered the template will not be saved. Ensure all [errors are resolved](#fixing-template-problems) for the template to save successfully."

   :::info Project scope
   A connector template is always associated with a project, hence only available in the project where you added it.
   :::

### JSON editor features

The JSON editor is based on the [Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/). The Monaco Editor is the editor that powers VS Code. As a result, the template editor supports many familiar features such as auto-formatting, indentation support, code completion, and error highlighting. Read the [VS Code editor docs](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/editingevolved) for a full overview of features.

### Versioning connector templates

You can version your connector templates using [milestones](/components/modeler/web-modeler/milestones.md), similar to diagrams.

If you publish a new version of a connector template, and the old version was already used in diagrams, the user can decide to update to the most recent version, or to stay with the old version when editing the respective diagram element (see updating [element templates](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/using-templates/#updating-templates)).

> ## Fixing problems in your templates {#fixing-template-problems}

Reviewer 2: Is there a particular reason why you've included the curly braces and text here?

Author: @christinaausley This is an anchor link and allows you to link to a specific section inside a single page

---
id: manage-connector-templates
title: Manage Connector templates
description: Manage your Connector templates in Web Modeler.
---

export const UploadIcon = () => <span style={{verticalAlign: "text-top"}}><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 24 24" width="16" height="16"><path d="M0 0h24v24H0z" fill="none"></path><path d="M9 16h6v-6h4l-7-7-7 7h4zm-4 2h14v2H5z" fill="currentColor"></path></svg></span>;

<span class="badge badge--cloud">Camunda Platform 8 only</span>

You can create and manage [Connector templates](/components/integration-framework/connectors/custom-built-connectors/connector-templates.md) just as any other asset in a Web Modeler project.

## Create Connector templates

> Take the following steps to create a new Connector template::

Reviewer 3: Minor tweak:
Update text from "Take the following steps to create a new Connector template::"
to "The steps to create a new Connector template are as follows:"

1. Navigate to the project of your choice and click **New**.

2. Click **Connector Template**.

   ![Creating a new template](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-1.png)

3. You will be taken to the **Connector template editor** screen. In this screen, you can define the Connector template by writing the template JSON. The template editor supports you in writing the template by providing autocompletion, error highlighting, and a live preview.

>    The anatomy of the editor interface is as follows:

Reviewer 3: Minor tweak:
Update text from "The anatomy of the editor interface is as follows:"
to "The components of the editor interface are as follows:"

   - In the **breadcrumbs bar**, you can rename your template by clicking the chevron next to the template name. Note that you cannot change the name of your template in the template JSON, but only with this action.
   - On the left, you see the **template JSON editor**. Here, you define the actual template descriptor. The descriptor follows the [most recent element template schema](https://github.com/camunda/element-templates-json-schema). The editor is divided into two sections: a read-only section, containing the schema reference, the template name, the template id, and an editable section, where you can [define your template descriptor](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/defining-templates.md).

>    - On the right, you see the live **Visual Preview**. The live preview shows how the properties panel will look when you apply the template to an element. It automatically updates on every valid change, and reflects the latest valid state of the template. The preview allows you to interactively check your template before publishing, including its usability.

Reviewer 3: Minor tweak:
Update text from ".... publishing, including its usability."
to ".... publishing, enhancing its usability."

   - In the upper left, you can **Upload an icon** for your template. You can upload any image file you want, however we recommend to use squared SVG graphics. The icons get rendered 18x18 pixels in the element on the modeling canvas, and 32x32 pixels in the properties panel.

   On every valid change, the template is saved automatically. In case of a problem, the template is not saved, and you need to [fix it beforehand](#fixing-template-problems).

>    ![Template editor anatomy](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-2.png)

Reviewer 3: Update text from "Template editor anatomy" 
to "Template editor component"

4. Once you've written your template, publish it by clicking **Publish**. You will be prompted to optionally enter a version name. This name appears in your milestone list.

   ![Publishing a template](img/connector-templates/create-connector-template-3.png)

5. After publishing, the template can be applied to elements of all models in the same project.

   :::info Project scope
   A Connector template is always associated with a project, hence only available in the project where you added it.
   :::

### JSON editor features

The JSON editor is based on the [Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/). The Monaco Editor is the editor that powers VS Code. As a result, the template editor supports many familiar features, such as auto-formatting, indentation support, code completion, and error highlighting.

Read the [VS Code editor docs](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/editingevolved) for a full overview of features.

### Versioning Connector templates

You can version your Connector templates using [milestones](/components/modeler/web-modeler/milestones.md), similar to diagrams.

> If you publish a new version of a Connector template and the old version is already used in diagrams, the user can either update these diagram Connector templates to the most recent version, or maintain the older version when editing the respective diagram element (see updating [element templates](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/using-templates.md#updating-templates)).

Reviewer 3: Minor tweak:
Update text from "If you publish a new version of a Connector template and the old version is already used in diagrams, the user can either update these diagram Connector templates to the most recent version, or maintain the older version when editing the respective diagram element (see updating [element templates](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/using-templates.md#updating-templates))."

to "If you publish a new version of a Connector template and an older version is being used in diagrams, the user has two options, they can either update their diagrams to use the most recent version of the Connector template, or they can continue using the older version of the Connector template in their diagrams. See updating [element templates](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/using-templates.md#updating-templates)."

Author: I will go for 

> If you publish a new version of a Connector template and an older version is already being used in diagrams, the user can either [update the diagram elements](/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/using-templates.md#updating-templates) to use the most recent version of the Connector template, or they can continue using the older version of the Connector template in their diagrams.

since this covers Max's, Christina's and your suggestions.

## Fixing problems in your templates {#fixing-template-problems}

While working on a template, the template will be in invalid intermediate states. For instance, when you add a new property, it must contain various mandatory attributes.

Unless all mandatory attributes are defined, the template will not be saved, and the preview is not updated. This ensures that you can never publish an invalid or broken template.

The editor toolbar indicates if the template is currently in a valid state or not. The JSON editor provides you with error highlighting, allowing you to add mandatory values and resolve problems without missing anything.

![Indicating problems in connector templates](img/connector-templates/fix-connector-template-problems.png)

If there are problems at the root level of the JSON (such as a missing or misspelled mandatory attribute,) the error is highlighted in the first line of the editor. Click the error marker at the curly bracket to expand the error message.

![Some connector template problems highlighted in the first line](img/connector-templates/fix-connector-template-problems-2.png)

<!--
## Reusing existing runtimes

> Not only can you create new Connector templates to bind to a job worker topic or a custom Connector SDK function, but you can also reuse [existing connector runtimes](/components/integration-framework/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/available-connectors-overview.md). For instance, if you add the following property and bind it to `zeebe:taskDefinition:type`, you can reuse the HTTP JSON runtime and write a prefilled Connector template to call an API easily.

Reviewer 3: Minor tweak:
Update text from "Not only can you create new Connector templates to bind to a job worker topic or a custom Connector SDK function,"
to "Not only can you create new Connector templates to bind to a job worker topic or a custom connector function you've created using the Connector SDK,"

```json
{
    "type": "Hidden",
    "value": "io.camunda:http-json:1",
    "binding": {
        // highlight-next-line
        "type": "zeebe:taskDefinition:type"
    }
}
```
-->

## Importing existing Connector templates

> If you have created templates for Desktop Modeler in the past and want to reuse them in Web Modeler, you need to make some adjustments to the template files:

Reviewer 3: Minor tweak:
Remove text "in the past"
